[THEME MUSIC]
>> My name is Gregg Braden.
I'd like to welcome you to
this very special presentation
of "Missing Links", the deep
truth of our origin, history,
destiny, and fate.
In our last episode
we discovered
how the mysterious
genetic fusion of DNA
endows us with this
extraordinary potential.
And we also
discovered that we can
awaken this potential when
we choose, when we want,
on demand.
Well, in this episode
I'd like to explore
two of those abilities, two
of those potentials-- super
learning and deep intuition,
as well as the technique
that we use to awaken
these things in our lives.
So we're talking about
this union, this marriage
between our heart and our
brains-- a very, very different
way to think about
things in the West,
very different from what
we are traditionally
invited to consider.
When I was in school, I was
taught that the brain is
the master organ in the body.
And when I am working
with indigenous people,
often I'm taught
that the heart is
the master organ in the body.
And I want to just say
to you that both of those
are valid in some circumstances.
But the truth is, they're both
incomplete, because what we now
know is that while the brain--
our brain-- releases
the chemistry
into our bodies for
rejuvenation, and healing,
and hormonal balance, and
all these other things,
our brain receives many of
the instructions that tell it
what to do from the heart.
And we are the ones that
create the instructions
through our thoughts,
feelings, emotions, and beliefs
that we are creating
in our hearts,
because now, as you remember,
the studies are showing
our heart has the ability
to think on its own,
to remember, and
to feel on its own.
So we're having a
new sense of what
this heart-brain
connection is all about.
And as I mentioned
before, we've been
conditioned to use
them independently,
one or the other.
So I'm acknowledging that I know
this is a very different way
to think about our
heart and our brain,
to think about them
as two organs that
support a single,
common neural network.
And just in case
there's any question
in your mind, that network--
it is about the nerves.
It's about the spinal
cord between the heart
and the brain, and the vagus
nerve between the heart
and the brain.
And this conversation between
the heart and the brain, it
fascinates me.
It's a big conversation
that's happening
in every moment of every day.
But the thing is, most
of the conversation
is, in fact, coming from
our heart to our brain.
That's where the
thickest nerve bundle is,
to support that conversation.
There is a lesser
conversation from the brain,
through the spinal cord,
back into the heart.
So while it's
possible, the brain
doesn't say too
much to the heart.
The heart has a lot
to say to the brain.
All of this connection
leads to the capabilities
that we began speaking
about in the last episode.
And I'm going to talk about
them a little bit more
now in more detail.
This whole idea of intuition--
it's a very powerful sense.
It is a knowing,
a direct knowing,
our hearts knowing of when
something is true for us
and when it's not.
And we have to be very, very
clear about when we're actually
hearing information
from our heart,
or whether the information
is coming from there.
Or maybe it's coming
from the subconscious,
or maybe it's
coming from a fear.
It's just good to be very clear
about where this information is
coming from.
And people ask me
all the time, when
I speak at live
events-- they ask
me to make decisions for
them and to interpret
their experiences for them.
But I could never
decide, and I could never
interpret because
the experiences have
happened to them.
Let me just give you an example.
It's very common for people to
ask me, Gregg, I had a dream
last night.
And in the dream--
and very detailed--
I saw this.
I saw that.
Gregg, what does
this dream mean?
And what I have to say
to them, very honestly
and very factually, is I
couldn't begin to tell you
what that dream means.
I have no idea, I
didn't have the dream.
You had the dream.
And I'm saying this
to you right now.
If you are powerful enough to
have the kinds of dreams that
are so vivid and so lucid
that you remember them
even in your waking hours,
then you are powerful enough
to ask your own body,
to ask your intuition,
to ask your heart, what
does this dream mean for me?
What am I being
shown in this dream?
Why am I being shown
what I'm showing?
What does it mean in my life?
Ask those kinds of questions.
When you ask them,
if you will ask them
from your heart, rather
than your brain-- and
we're going to share the
techniques, in this episode,
about precisely how to do it.
It's another form of intuition.
And I'm saying this
now to acknowledge
that I know intuition has
a lot of different forms.
Sometimes our intuition,
it is spontaneous,
like the phone calls
between my mother and I
that I spoke of in
the last episode.
I pick up the phone,
she's already there.
Other kinds of intuition,
we just call a gut instinct.
That's a form of
intuition as well.
Scientists tell us, for
example, that we know--
when we meet another
person, we will
know within three seconds--
now think about this.
You will know
within three seconds
if you like someone or
not, when you meet them.
Your intuition, your
heart will know.
Now, in our culture,
we are taught
to discount that,
because we say,
oh, you're being judgmental.
You don't even know the person.
You haven't given them a chance.
And that's all true, but your
heart has picked up something.
It's picked up something in
a vibratory, energetic field,
about another person.
I'm not saying it's right,
wrong, good, or bad.
It's something that just
may not be a good fit.
And it's telling you that.
And there's a reason
why we have this.
Our ancestors had this long
ago, because 10,000 years ago we
didn't have the opportunity
to invite someone
to have coffee in a coffee
shop and get to know them,
to know if they were
a threat to us or not.
We had to know immediately.
When we met someone
out on the open plains,
or if you walked into a
cave to make it your home
and found that it was
already someone else's home,
is that a threat?
Is that a personal threat?
And we need to know
really, really fast.
But it goes even
deeper than that.
One of the really
fascinating pieces
of research that
we're beginning to see
is that men and women
think differently.
We know that.
That's not the research.
But women and men do
think very differently.
And this is one of the places
where our intuitive instincts
become very, very different.
Studies have shown
that a woman, a woman
will know, in her heart, within
180 seconds-- that's 3 minutes.
A woman will know
within 180 seconds
if the person standing
before her, in her field,
is a potential compatible
life mate or not--
successful life mate.
A woman's heart will know.
Her intuition will know within
180 seconds, on the one hand.
But in our culture,
we are so often
conditioned to discount that.
So a woman will feel that.
She'll discount that.
And she will give that person
that she has encountered
3, 5, 10, maybe 20
years of her life
to experience and
demonstrate in real life
what her heart knew
in only 3 minutes.
And we see this
happen all the time.
I actually have friends,
multiple friends,
that this has happened to, where
partners agreed to be married.
And on the day of the
wedding, the woman
says, I can't go
through with this,
because this is not the
right person for me.
She has known all along.
She always had this suspicion.
But she says, I can't
go through with it.
However, the peer
pressure of all the family
coming from all over the
world, all of the energy,
all of the money, all the
preparations, all the friends--
in the case that I'm thinking of
right now, this friend of mine
actually went through
with the wedding,
knowing that it would
not last and that she
would have to end the wedding
at another time, which
she did about a year later.
So it happens that
way, sometimes.
And I have a male friend
that had the same experience.
I was going to be the
best man in his wedding.
I went to pick him up
in northern Missouri.
And he was sitting on the front
porch in a pair of blue jeans
and flip-flops.
And I was in a tux
for his wedding.
And he said, where
are you going?
And I said, I'm going
to your wedding.
And he said, I can't.
I can't go through with this.
He says, I'm going to go
fishing today, and he did.
He left and went fishing.
And we had to tell his fiance
what it was that was happening.
And I'm sharing
this story with you
because it was a doubt
that he had in his mind.
But when they
reconciled that doubt,
they ended up getting married.
They did get married.
And they have been married
now for over 30 years.
So it's all about
realizing and recognizing,
what is our intuition
saying to us?
And one of the ways
to do that, rather
than through the fear and
the peer pressure, is we've
got to go into our heart to
understand exactly what it
is that it's saying.
Let me just give you another
example of how this plays out,
and it's a personal
example for me.
I was in Australia
over September 11.
I couldn't even get back
into my own country.
The air traffic was closed.
And when they opened
the air traffic again,
I was on the first flight
from Sydney, Australia
back into Los Angeles,
California, here in the States.
There weren't many
people on that flight.
It was a huge plane, and there
were fewer than 20 people
on the entire flight.
So when the flight
was ready to board,
the gate attendant came out
and made an announcement.
And here's what she said.
She said, there are so
few people on this flight,
we're not going
to board in zones.
You can board whenever
you'd like to.
She said, you can board
this plane for the States,
and it will get you there, if
that's where you want to go.
And I looked at her,
and I said, well,
that's a powerful vote of
confidence for this flight.
And she says, hey, if you
want to take this plane
and go to America, this plane
is going to take you there.
She goes, we don't know
what just happened.
And it looks really,
really scary from where
we are right now-- never
seen this happen before.
And it set up a little
fear in my mind.
So I asked her, I said,
please wait right here.
I stepped around the corner.
And I used a technique
that I'm going
to share with you
in just a moment,
because my brain was
spinning with all kinds
of possibilities.
Did she know something I didn't?
Did TSA say something,
or air traffic control,
or was something else going on?
And I know you all have
had these experiences,
where something happens in your
life and there's no one to ask,
because no one knows the answer.
And everyone that
you do ask is going
to give you a different answer.
You see this happen all
the time with people
that have a health crisis.
And the doctor wants
them to do one thing,
and they've got
a million friends
giving them a million
alternative ways
to heal naturally or herbally.
And their head is spinning.
And they say, I don't
know what to do,
because there is
no right and wrong.
And there's no one to ask.
All we have is
ourselves and our heart.
So what I did, stepped
around the corner.
I began communicating
with my heart in the way
that I've learned through
heart-brain harmony
that we're going to do
here, in just a moment.
And I got a very clear
sense-- and it's amazing
how crystal-clear the
information from our heart
becomes when we do this.
Let me just give you a
couple of indications.
When your heart is
speaking to you,
your heart speaks briefly,
concisely, usually in a phrase
or in a single sentence.
Rarely-- I'm not
going to say never,
because everyone's different--
rarely will your heart begin
to tell you a story
and a big preamble
to justify the answer that
it's about to give to you.
So if you ask a
question from within--
what does this dream mean,
or should I get onto this
airplane, or should I follow
this medical procedure--
and you start to hear a
story-- well, you know,
when I was five years old,
I had this experience, and--
probably, probably
that's not your heart.
It's probably
something in your mind,
your logic, or
your ego that feels
it needs to justify the answer.
Heart would never do that.
So I went through a process.
I felt it was OK to
get on that plane.
I got on the plane,
I had a great flight
back to Los Angeles.
I came back to a very
different country
from the one I had
left 10 days earlier.
But the point is, it
was a safe flight.
It was good.
And if I'd listened
to my fears, I
may have delayed coming
back days or maybe weeks,
because there was so
much fear around this.
Only by listening
to our hearts--
now, this is one
facet of intuition.
And I've just shared
a couple of these,
knowing about
partnerships, knowing
when something is right for us.
There's another kind
of intuition, very fast
information processing.
And I alluded to it
in a previous episode,
in the last episode.
And I'd like to just share a
little bit more about this,
just to clarify what I'm saying.
Interestingly, it took the
most sophisticated research
of the most modern equipment,
and using that equipment
on some of the most ancient and
primitive practices of Tibetan
monks, for scientists to
begin to understand how
this form of intuition works.
And it works by using
a brain state that
used to not even show up
in the pages of a textbook.
I'm going to invite you to
look at your screen right now.
And I'm going to talk about
brain states just for a moment.
What you're seeing
on your screen
are the traditional
brain states,
at the very bottom of the
screen-- the delta waves, long,
slow waves.
And these are when
we're deeply asleep.
And then the theta
waves, when we
become drowsy; the
alpha waves, where
we're more relaxed and
maybe in meditation;
the beta waves-- this is where,
maybe, you are right now,
when we're busily engaged
in daily activities.
This used to be the end
of the brain states.
But there is another brain
state that scientists
are working with now, and
it is above the beta wave.
It is called gamma.
This is the gamma state.
And look at how much faster
and how much more compressed
these brain waves are.
Well, interestingly,
these are the brainwaves
that the Tibetan monks were
creating in their bodies
intentionally, on
demand, to accomplish
the amazing feats of healing,
of awareness, of intuition.
They're able to regulate their
body functions, their body
temperatures, their
immune response,
their anti-aging hormones, all
on demand, when they choose.
And this is where
they find their power,
by realizing this potential.
So I'm sharing this with you
now because, interestingly
and perhaps not
surprisingly, it is
by harmonizing the
heart and the brain
that we achieve
this gamma state--
one of the ways that
we can achieve it--
that we achieve this
gamma state intentionally.
And when we create
the gamma state,
one of the first things
that scientists say to us
is it opens the door
to precisely what we've
been talking about--
to states of deep intuition.
It opens the door
to increased focus,
where we can recall everything
about any memorable event.
This sounds like some of
the very popular television
programs, where individuals are
trained to become superhumans.
And they walk into
a room and boom,
they know everything
about everyone
in that room, total recall.
The gamma state
is what allows us
very fast processing of storage,
and information, and retrieval.
And it actually
makes a lot of sense
that we would be
able to do that.
When you think about fast
information retrieval
and involving the heart, if
you really think about it,
this makes tremendous
sense for this reason.
When we process information
solely in the brain, when
you ask your brain a
question, the answers
generally are a little slower.
And as I mentioned
before, in the heart
they're, boom, almost
instantaneously.
Often, when we ask
our heart a question,
it answers before we
finish asking the question.
And the reason makes
a lot of sense.
It's because the brain,
before it gives us the answer,
goes through all of the loops
of the logic, the fears,
the issues that have
come up in the past,
the issues of self-doubt,
the issues of self-esteem.
All of those things,
those are the logic loops
that the brain goes
through, the filters,
before it gives us an answer.
Heart doesn't do that.
Heart, you ask your
heart a question, boom,
it gives you the answer.
Part of my heritage is
Native American, is Cherokee.
And in the Cherokee tradition,
as well as in some others
in the Midwest of
the United States,
our indigenous ancestors knew
of this power of the heart.
And they actually
gave it a name.
And this is one of the things--
there is no English translation
specifically for this name.
There is no single
English word that
means precisely what
the Native words mean.
So we have to create English
words around it, like prana.
When we say the word prana,
that is a Sanskrit word.
There is no English
word that means prana.
So we have to create
some other words.
We say energy body or life force
to approximate what it means.
Well, same things happen
with the wisdom of the heart.
And the word that's used is
called [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH],
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH].
And it means the single
eye of the heart,
the heart that doesn't judge
right, wrong, good, bad.
The heart can discern what's
true for us and what's not,
yet it does not
assign a judgment.
That's a powerful distinction,
and that will empower you
in situations, whether
you're in the boardroom,
or the classroom, or
you're with your friends,
or in the most intimate
relationships with those that
are closest to
you, where you tap
and they know you
well enough to tap
the buttons and the triggers
that elicit responses
that sometimes you wish
you hadn't have said.
If you can get out of your
brain and go into your heart,
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH], the
single eye of the heart--
it'll tell you what's true
for you, and you only.
It can't tell you what's
true for someone else.
And it will do it
with discernment.
So it makes a lot of sense
that the gamma state actually
allows us this very,
very fast processing.
The gamma state, also,
when we achieve that,
it's a natural antidepressant.
People are happier, and
they're much calmer,
when they're in
this gamma state.
And it also awakens.
It breathes life into
our sensory perception.
When we're in the gamma state,
we can pick up scents that we
cannot pick up, typically,
in the beta state.
You smell things.
It becomes alive.
Your sensations of sound--
music feels differently.
It doesn't just sound.
It feels differently to you.
These are all the benefits
of being in the gamma state.
So I'm saying this to
you now because we're
about to move into
the gamma state,
and I want you to know
all the benefits that
come from doing precisely this.
So we've explored many
of the potentials that
come from awakening this
marriage, this union
between the heart and the brain.
And there are others.
We're just barely
scratching the surface.
But what I'd like
to do now is share
with you a technique,
a technique so
that you can tap these
potentials in your life
when you choose to do so.
What scientists know is that
every moment of every day,
as I mentioned, there's
this conversation.
It's a conversation between
the heart and the brain.
The heart is speaking
to the brain.
And the quality of
the conversation
that comes from the
heart and the brain
tells the brain what chemistry
to release into the body.
So for example, when we're
feeling emotions that we would
typically consider negative--
and I don't like to
characterize emotions
as negative or positive.
But I'm doing this so that
you get a sense for what
we're doing here.
When we have emotions such
as anger, hate, jealousy,
rage, what you're
seeing on your screen
is an actual printout of
the quality of the signal
from the heart to the brain.
And you can see,
it's very chaotic.
It's a very jagged signal.
It's a rough signal.
And it's that chaotic,
jagged, rough signal
that signals chaotic
chemistry in your brain.
This is the kind of
chemistry that tells us
that we need high amounts
of adrenaline, high amounts
of cortisol, the stress
hormones to respond to something
quickly in life.
That's a good thing
for a few moments.
You don't want to live your
life, day in and day out,
like this.
The next image
that you're seeing
is what happens
when we can shift
our heart-based experiences from
things like frustration, anger,
hate, jealousy, and rage
to things like compassion,
care for anything,
gratitude for anything,
appreciation for anything.
And when we can do that,
very, very quickly,
this signal from the
heart to the brain shifts.
And you're seeing that it
becomes a very rhythmic, very
even, very coherent signal.
This is what it's called.
And it sends a different
signal to our brain,
and our brain begins to
release a different chemistry
into our bodies.
Now, I'm saying this to you now
because I want you to know that
your brain cannot do both
things at the same time.
It can only do one or the other.
So when you are in
coherent feeling
and that even rhythm, that's
what awakens your brain
to send powerful
healing chemistry,
powerful immune response,
powerful anti-aging hormones,
awakens your senses,
turns on that gamma, OK?
And when you are in the
rough, jagged signal,
that's fight or flight.
Your body and your brain are
saying something important
is happening.
We've got to run or fight, so
we don't have time for healing.
We don't have time for
an immune response.
anti-aging hormones.
They're not important.
So it shuts off those functions
in preferential treatment
of this fight or flight.
So for this reason, you can
see why fight or flight's good
momentarily.
You don't want it long term.
We can shift these brain
states very, very quickly.
And what I'd like
to do now is, I'm
going to share a technique
with you to help to do this.
We can measure this conversation
between the heart and the brain
electrically.
And it is a very low
frequency, so this
isn't an esoteric essence
of a prana or aura.
This is an electrical
and a magnetic frequency.
And the electrical part is
a very, very low frequency.
It is 0.1 hertz.
It's not even 1--
0.1 hertz.
This is such a low frequency,
you can't even hear this.
It is right on the threshold
between feeling and hearing.
It's a frequency that whales use
to communicate in the oceans,
so it's a very
universal frequency.
It's also a frequency
that military submarines
use to communicate
in the oceans, which
is why it's a problem for
the whales when they use it.
And it is the optimal
signal to harmonize
your heart and your brain.
So what this means is if
you can create a feeling
in your heart of 0.1
hertz, then that feeling
is going to harmonize
your heart and your brain.
Now, in indigenous traditions
that I've been with,
they have techniques to do this.
The Institute of
HeartMath that I mentioned
in the last episode, they
have refined these techniques
in the laboratory into
very, very simple steps that
make them accessible in
our everyday environment,
whether we're in an
urban environment,
whether we're in a
military environment,
a first-responder environment.
This technique has been used
in all these environments
that I'm mentioning now--
in family, in marriage and
family counseling environments,
in cardiac environments
to help deal
with blood pressure
and cardiac events
that are happening
within our bodies.
So there are a vast
and myriad number
of applications for
the one technique
that we're going
to do right now.
And this technique is the
doorway for all the potentials
that we have just listed.
By achieving heart-brain
coherence, it opens the door,
and we get to choose.
It's like once we're
in this place, now
we can do this,
this, this, or this.
We can do subconscious.
We can go into intuition.
We can simply use this technique
before we go to bed at night,
to begin to sleep and trigger
a healing within our bodies.
We can do it first
thing in the morning.
We can do it before our yoga.
We can do it before
our martial arts.
We can do it before our qi
gong, our healing practice,
any of these things, because
everything goes better
with heart-brain coherence.
And that's all we're
doing, is we're
optimizing the conversation
between the heart
and the brain, between
your heart and your brain.
So how do we do this?
Three steps-- the first step is
to simply shift your awareness
from your mind into your heart.
And what I've found is,
in the Western traditions,
for many people that's
easier said than done.
I'll ask people, are
you in your heart?
And they'll say, yep.
I'm in my heart.
But what they are
really doing is,
they're still in
their brain thinking
about what it would be like
if they were in their heart.
This is where the indigenous
traditions come in.
Our ancestors told us--
and when I spend time with
my indigenous friends,
I say, how do you guys do this?
And they say, it helps if you
can gently touch your heart
center, physically, in a way
that's comfortable for you.
In the Mayan traditions
you see an open palm right
on the heart.
In many of the Middle
Eastern traditions,
you see the same thing.
In the Buddhist traditions
you see a prayer mudra
that physically
touches the sternum.
The key is any of
those things creates
a gentle touch, a
physical sensation,
right over the heart center.
And your awareness will
always go to the place
where you feel the sensation.
That's the key.
So if you can create a
touch over your heart,
your awareness will
go there-- first step.
Second step, very simple--
slow your breathing a little
bit slower than typical,
maybe five seconds inhale,
five seconds exhale.
And here's why that's powerful--
because the only time you would
ever slow your breathing
and breathe in that way
is when you feel safe,
when you feel that you're
in a place that's safe,
and you're not threatened,
and you're not vigilant
of your surroundings.
So you're telling your body
you're in a place that's safe.
Slow your breathing.
Third step, and
this is the key, is
to begin to feel the feeling
that creates 0.1 hertz.
Feel the feeling that
sets up the coherence
between your heart
and your brain.
How do we do that?
I gave it away earlier.
I've already mentioned it.
Scientists have found-- at
the Institute of HeartMath,
their researchers have found
that there are four key words
that work almost 100% of
the time for everyone--
appreciation for
anything or anyone,
gratitude for anything or
anyone, care, and compassion.
If you can feel one or some
combination of those feelings
in your heart, while you're
breathing as if your breath is
coming from your heart,
touching your heart center,
now you're setting up this
communication between the heart
and the brain.
Now you are triggering
those neurons
to begin to reach out and find
other neurons to strengthen
this connection.
And that's why-- I
mentioned before--
it takes about 72 hours, 3
days to build these networks.
So that means the
more you do what
we're about to do right now,
the stronger this connection
becomes in your life.
Let's try this.
Let's go through this together.
And this is the way we're going
to close out our segment today.
I'm going to invite you
first to shift your awareness
from your mind into your heart
by gently touching your heart
center.
OK, now once you're
there, breathe
a little slower
than you typically
would, maybe five seconds
inhale, five seconds exhale.
And as you breathe, feel your
breath coming from your heart.
And begin to feel
those feelings--
compassion, gratitude,
care, appreciation
to the best of your ability,
to the best of your ability.
And I'm going to do the same.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
OK, and what
researchers have found
is that typically three
minutes, only three minutes,
of doing what we have just done
will set into motion a cascade
of events within your
body-- biochemical events
that will last as
long as six hours.
The immune response--
the SIgA response,
first line immune in the white
blood cells of your mouth--
they are reflecting this
effect for up to six hours
after you actually
create the experience.
So I mentioned that we can
do this any time of day.
You can do it before you sleep
at night, first thing when
you wake up in the morning.
This technique, as
simple as it seems,
is the powerful key
to awaken the greatest
potential in your life.
The simple technique that
we have just experienced,
it is the key to
our personal power
and to the doorway of all
the abilities considered
rare and mystical in the past.
We don't have to
go to a monastery
halfway around the
world to learn them.
In our next episode,
we're going to discover
how this very technique
is also the key
to trigger the self-healing
within your body that
leads to an extended
lifespan, well beyond what's
traditionally accepted today.
So I want to thank
you for joining me
for this very powerful episode.
And be sure to tune in
for our next all-new
episode of "Missing Links",
the deep truth of our origin,
history, destiny, and fate.
[THEME MUSIC]